

The State of The Automated Coin Toll Service in Canada
unity 2003


ACTS: Automated Coin Toll Service. ACTS is the system by which Ma Bell determines how much 
money has been deposited into a payphone. ACTS replaced operators, and created autonomy in the 
revenue collection systems for payphones. ACTS currently works on a DTMF (Dual-Tone-Multi-
Frequency) system, a tone comprised of 2200Hz + 1700Hz. ACTS is currently used to determine 
charges and monitor long-distance calls through the AT&T system. Apparently, AT&T has filed 
with the FCC to discontinue sent-paid toll services. This would spell the end of ACTS.

Now, Telus has been phasing out sent-paid toll service for a while now, slowly replacing 
coin-first long-distance payphones with calling-card-only payphones. And who wouldnt want to? 
Calling cards are a much safer and more fraud-resistant method of charging long-distance calls. 
In the 780 area code I have noticed only a few new phones coming in with no long-distance 
coin-first calling abilites. Older Nortel (Quortech?) Centurions are still redbox-able, though.
But those too are being phased out, darn those Telus boys! Its really a love-hate relationship. 
Word has it that Telus is planning to completely phase out coin based long distance calling 
within the next few years, so enjoy it while you can! By the way, 2200Hz + 1700Hz DTMF is 
equivalent to a single tone 2200Hz up north, here in Canada.

ACTS-equipped payphones can be fooled by redboxing quite easily. For those of you who arent 
aware, a red box is any device that can play back the tones that are used by tone-signalling 
pay telephones to identify that money has been put in the coin slot. Basically, at the heart, 
a red box is any device that is capable of creating or playing back a 2200Hz + 1700Hz DTMF tone. 

You can make a red box quite easily using a digital, tapeless recorder. Such a recorder can be 
purchased at a Radio Shack for probably between 10 and 20 dollars. Simply record the 2200Hz + 
1700Hz tone into the digital recorder, and you can play it back into the mouthpeice of the 
payphone to get your "cash". This isnt a tutorial on how to make a red box though, so thats 
enough of that.

Anyways, ACTS is used on Telus's older Nortel Centurion payphones to determine the pricing for 
long-distance calls. When you dial a long distance call, an automated operator comes in on the 
line, saying something along the lines of, "Getting Rates, Please Wait...". So you wait. 
Eventually the automated operator comes back on the line, and will ask you to deposit a certian 
amount of money. At this time, you can use your red box to fool the payphone into thinking that 
you have already deposited your money. As the operator asks for money, you play your tones into 
the phone, and voila! Free long distance calls. Every so often the operator will come back on, 
into the conversation, and will ask you to insert more money, when this happens, just play 
your tones again.

Its suprising that a red box-able service such as ACTS has survived as long as it has, but 
enjoy it while it lasts! Once Telus phases it out, there will be no more ACTS.


